arXiv:2405.02148v1  [cs.AI]  3 May 2024Towards a Formal Creativity Theory:
Preliminary results in Novelty and Transformativeness
Lu´ıs Esp ´ırito Santo
CMS – CISUC,
University of Coimbra, Portugal
lesanto@dei.uc.pt
CCLab – AILab,
Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium
luis.espirito.santo@vub.beGeraint Wiggins
CCLab – AILab
Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium
Cognitive Science Group
Queen Mary University of London, UK
geraint.wiggins@vub.beAm´ılcar Cardoso
Centre for Informatics and Systems (CISUC),
University of Coimbra, Portugal
amilcar@dei.uc.pt
Abstract
Formalizing creativity-related concepts has been a long-
term goal of Computational Creativity. To the same end,
we explore Formal Learning Theory in the context of
creativity. We provide an introduction to the main con-
cepts of this framework and a re-interpretation of terms
commonly found in creativity discussions, proposing
formal deﬁnitions for novelty and transformational cre-
ativity. This formalisation marks the beginning of a
research branch we call Formal Creativity Theory, ex-
ploring how learning can be included as preparation for
exploratory behaviour and how learning is a key part
of transformational creative behaviour. By employing
these deﬁnitions, we argue that, while novelty is neither
necessary nor sufﬁcient for transformational creativity
in general, when using an inspiring set, rather than a se-
quence of experiences, an agent actually requires nov-
elty for transformational creativity to occur.
Introduction
Since its origins in the 1960s, the theory known as the For-
mal Learning Theory (FLT) was motivated by the task of
providing natural language capabilities to machines. It ha s
equally been used to explore long-lasting debates on chil-
dren’s intellectual development or even to structure philo -
sophical ﬁelds such as epistemology. It is a nonstatistical
research stem within Computational Learning Theory (CLT)
which facilitates the examination of limitations pertaini ng to
learning under theoretical conditions, such as inﬁnite dat a,
time, and space. As such, both language acquisition and sci-
entiﬁc discovery are traditionally employed and vastly ex-
plored for the purpose of illustrating and inspiring FLT.
Some authors, such as Koestler (2014), argue that cre-
ativity has a major role in tasks like language acquisition
and scientiﬁc discovery, often seen solely as learning. How -
ever, others ﬁnd this hard to accept, as Ritchie (2007, p. 69)
suggests: “Mathematics, science, or engineering are rarel y
classed as creative unless they are done exceptionally well .
This bias does not seem helpful in a rigorous attempt to pin
down the notion of creativity, particularly when applied to
machines. Although there is still a tendency within AI to tac -
itly accept this intellectual apartheid of creative versus non-
creative activities, it would be better if we could be more
neutral in our formal characterisation of creative actions .”We believe that some ideas in FLT could have a useful
purpose for creativity studies, especially in structuring and
formalizing matters. Our exploration of this theory is an at -
tempt at formalizing concepts in Computational Creativity
(CC), following a series of similar attempts that are based
on other theoretical ﬁelds such as: the early developments
by Wallas (1926), Rhodes (1961) and Guilford (1950);
Boden’s (1994) ideas and their subsequent examination by
others such as Bundy (1994) and Ritchie (2006); Wiggins’
(2019) progress at bringing extra rigour to Boden’s (2004)
proposal; Schmidhuber’s (2010) project to formalise cre-
ativity; Colton, Charnley, and Pease’s (2011) proposal of
Computational Creativity Theory; Ventura’s (2011) adapta -
tion of the “No Free Lunch Theorem”; Shannon’s Informa-
tion Theory use by Varshney (2019, 2020) and the approach
to Kolmogorov Complexity by Mondol and Brown (2021).
In this paper, our goal is three-fold: 1) to introduce the
ideas behind FLT; 2) to provide formal deﬁnitions for some
creativity-related terminology, inspired in FLT; 3) to sho w
how these formal deﬁnitions allow to explore and demon-
strate results about creativity, by exploring the effectiv e role
of novelty in transformational creativity (Boden, 2004).
The Endless Explanation of “Grey Music”
In this section, we present an anecdote, a scenario, that set s
the stage for our explanation of FLT, by illustrating the fou n-
dational concepts within the context of a creative domain
and highlighting some important aspects. Since FLT is ag-
nostic and applicable across domains, this anecdote could
pertain to any creative domain and still illustrate the theo ry
as effectively. Besides, adapting it for other domains shou ld
be easily achievable. We chose the music domain and titled
our anecdote: The Endless Explanation of “Grey Music”.
Our story begins with a vinyl shop assistant and his
client1, as they embark on a journey around a musical genre
known as grey music , in a world where intensional deﬁni-
tions are avoided. The anecdote revolves around the client’ s
1FLT is agnostic in terms of what is considered a data provider
(client) and a learning agent (assistant). One can think of a ny data-
provider in place of the client such as a critic, an audience, na-
ture, or the assistant himself, and any data-consuming/hyp othesis-
producing entity in place of the assistant like a scientists , a ma-
chine, a team of people. While important for generalization , this
ﬂexibility can be overly complex for this introduction.extensional description of what she wants for a song and the
assistant’s efforts to understand this musical genre, whic h is
as mysterious to the assistant as it is clear to the client.
After acknowledging that the assistant has no idea of what
grey music , the musical genre, is, the client proceeds to in-
dicate songs: ‘You know, “Le Freak” by Chic. That is grey
music !’2. The client is determined to share every single grey
music song, even if there are inﬁnitely many, to ensure the
assistant gets it exactly correctly, no more no less, the sam e
way she does. Therefore, she will exhaustively exemplify
grey music , and every time she mentions a song, the assis-
tant may reﬁne his understanding of the term, adjusting his
conceptualization of grey music and creating different sets
of rules to represent their evolving comprehension.
The never-ending part of this story arrives when we un-
derstand that if this genre is big enough, i.e., inﬁnite, and the
motivations of the client and assistant never fade then they
would be able to stay this way forever. The client can never
be certain whether the assistant have the exactly correct co n-
ceptualization of grey music simply by analysing any ﬁnite
amount of songs suggested by the assistant given his cur-
rent understanding of the term – we will term this situation
in which the client lacks direct access to the assistant’s cu r-
rent conceptualization as the “evaluator conundrum”. Thus ,
the client keeps forever providing examples, wholly inde-
pendent of the assistants’s understanding3. Meanwhile, the
assistant also is perpetually uncertain about the exaclty c or-
rectgrey music ’s essence since he only has access to the ex-
amples and nothing more – to this other condition we will
call the “learner conundrum” – and has no capacity to inter-
vene in the data that is provided. By indeﬁnitely proceeding
the same way, they get stuck in an endless loop:
• the client keeps on exhaustively exemplifying grey music
uncertain if the assistant captured it exactly correctly;
• the assistant keeps on trying to acquire the exactly cor-
rect conceptualiation for the genre of grey music , pass-
ing through several hypothetical genres, but without ever
knowing if has matched the client’s idea exactly correctly.
Contrasting with practical research, this kind of thought
experiments provide us – as external observers – direct ac-
cess to both the client’s and shop assistant’s minds. There-
fore, despite their conundra, we can determine whether
they will ever successfully converge to precisely the same
genre or not. FLT takes advantage of this fact to theo-
retically explore which learning strategies enable assist ants
to to achieve success within various environments, seek-
ing to understand the nuanced dynamics between different
approaches and the contexts in which they are most effec-
tive. Additionally, this method also allows for the study of
whether there are genres that are impossible to discern apar t.
2Given this single example the reader might already feel the
urge to trying to unravel what grey music means. This illustrates
human’s predisposition to create these structures.
3Most FLT results assume the premise of passive learning,
where the learner observes data without the capacity of inte rvening.
Opposedly, active learning allows the learner to experimen t and the
data will change according to those actions. This dicothomy is dif-
ferent than the one between implicit vs deliberate learning .An Introduction to Formal Learning Theory
E. Mark Gold (1967) presented the ﬁrst theoretical re-
sults that became the foundations of a formal framework
to study inductive learning. Building on these results,
Blum and Blum (1975), Angluin (1980), Case and Smith
(1983) and Case (2012), as well as several other authors,
developed a set of other deﬁnitions and results that describ e
limits on what one learner can learn. We call the collection
of such deﬁnitions and results, FLT, which we now intro-
duce. In this introduction, we reproduce a slight adaptatio n
of some of the content in the comprehensive review of FLT
made available by Jain et al. (1999). For the sake of clar-
ity and ease of reference, we decided to compile this set
of deﬁnitions under a common name: Scientist Identifying
Languages in Texts (SILIT). This represents what we con-
sider to be the most basic framework presented in this area
that will serve as the basis for other possibly more intricat e
adaptations and extensions.
Learning Paradigm
The anecdote presented illustrates ﬁve components that can
be found in any empirical inquiry paradigm (Jain et al.,
1999) and are thus formalized in SILIT:
• a class of possible realities : In our anecdote, this pertains
to all potential music genres, abstracted as sets of songs.
• intelligible hypotheses : These refer the way to represent
the music genre that the assistant is thinking of at each
moment. This corresponds to the set of rules the assistant
produces to represent his hypothetical reality.
• the extensive data available about the correct reality: The
data in our anecdote are the songs provided by the client.
• alearner : This is anything that can turn data into hy-
potheses, which corresponds to our assistant; and
•criteria for success: In our case, we aim at what we des-
ignated as matching “exactly correctly”, i.e., the assis-
tant’s conceptualization perfectly aligns with the client ’s,
including no additional songs nor omissions. Various al-
ternative criteria are explored in different extensions.
Notation and Terminology
Here, we introduce some notation, primarily drawn from
the theory of computation, thoroughly explored by Rogers
(1967). We denote the empty set as ∅, whileNrepresents
the set of natural numbers. In this paper, Aencompasses the
set of all conceivable sentences within a chosen alphabet,
which serves as potential inputs for programs pwritten for a
selected Turing-equivalent algorithmic system. We will us e
Pto denote the set of all those possible programs. Within our
notation, Wpsigniﬁes the domain of the computable func-
tion expressed by program p. So, the statement L=Wp
readspis a (discriminative)4grammar for set L. Thus, ev-
ery program p∈Pis a grammar for exactly one set L⊆A.
4Discriminative grammars oppose to generative grammars.
Discriminative use the domain in their deﬁnition and can be u sed
directly to semi-decide what sentences are well-formed. Ge nera-
tive can be used to always output a well-formed sentence.Turing’s (1937) results imply that not all sets of sentences
have grammars, but those that do have a grammar always
have a Turing machine that lists all its members. Then, we
say that those sets which have grammars are therefore re-
cursively enumerable (r.e.) sets5and we denote the class of
such sets by E, and we can thus write E={Wp|p∈P}.
Scientists Identifying Languages in Texts
We designate SILIT to address what we consider to be the
most basic set of deﬁnitions among the several introduced by
Jain et al. (1999). It is arguably the most basic framework in
FLT, that can be expanded, adapted, and appropriated to in-
clude other kinds of interesting aspects. This framework as
well as its variations are different ways to formalise the ﬁv e
components that we ﬁnd in any empirical inquiry paradigm.
Similarly to many other ideas in the theory of computation,
the terminology revolves around languages and sentences,
to directly model language acquisition.
We will start by formalizing the class of possible reali-
ties, whose formalisation was directly borrowed from com-
putability theory. Since the learner must be able to point at
speciﬁc sets of things, for example, songs or sentences, one
way is to allow our learner to produce intrinsical deﬁnition s
for those sets. Using programs we can actually have a ﬁ-
nite representation for potentially inﬁnite sets. Thus, in this
framework, a possible reality is a r.e. set6, also designated
as a language, L∈E. So, in context of SILIT:
Deﬁnition 1 - Language (Reality). A language or a (possi-
ble) reality is a recursively enumerable set, L∈E. A class
of languages will be represented by symbol L⊆E.
Following this strategic choice, the hypotheses, i.e., the
way the learner intrinsically represents these realities, can
be abstracted using grammars, or in other words, computer
programs, p∈P7. These will be the output of the learner
when presented with data. Then every possible reality has at
least one corresponding hypothesis and every hypothesis as
exactly one reality to which it corresponds.
Deﬁnition 2 - Grammar (Hypothesis).
(a)Grammar . In this framework, a grammar, a hypothesis
or a conjecture is a program, p∈P.
(b)Language corresponds to a grammar . A language Lis
said to correspond to a grammar pif and only if L=Wp.
We address now how this framework models the data col-
lected from one speciﬁc ﬁxed reality. To faithfully emulate
this way of learning, we must ensure that the learner only ac-
cesses the correct reality indirectly through extensional data,
i.e., we need to model the learner conundrum by creating a
singular interface between the learner and the correct real ity.
One simple way to represent data is to consider an inﬁ-
nite sequence of positive examples encompassing all mem-
bers of the set – an exhaustive representative dataset. In th is
5The term r.e. set is usually applied to sets of natural number s
and not sentences, yet this is equivalent and simpler.
6There are alternative frameworks to learn functions rather than
sets. Yet, the latter is more general and interesting for cre ativity.
7In FLT these are represented using natural numbers by em-
ploying G¨ odel numbering as an index.area, this list-like representation of all the elements of a set
is termed as ‘text’, since this would correspond to an actual
text with all the sentences that could be written in a lan-
guage. In the same way, the words in a text do not change
based on what a reader is thinking, this structure is also in-
dependent of what the learner is outputting and may include
repetitions or even blank spaces, points of null data. In our
case, it will be an inﬁnite sequence of sentences that belong
to the chosen reality, without missing one. We also include
an extra symbol, #, that represents the inexistence of data.
Deﬁnition 3 - Text (Data).
(a)Text. A text Tis a mapping N→A∪{#}. This can
and will also be equivalently interpreted and noted as an
inﬁnite sequence x0,x1,x2, . . .of sentences where some
might be null, #, instead.
(b)Content of a text . The sentences appearing in this se-
quence are denoted content(T) =range(T)−{#}.
(c)Text exhaustively exempliﬁes a language . A textTis
said to exhaustively exemplify a language L∈Ein case
content(T) =L. In some literature, this reads Tis forL.
(d)Text operators . Given a text Tandn∈N, thenT(n)
represents the n+1thmember of T, whileT[n]represent
the initial ﬁnite sequence of length n, known as preﬁx.
(e)Preﬁx operators . Preﬁxes are represented using the fol-
lowing symbols: σ,τ. The length of preﬁx σis denoted
|σ|, the concatenation of preﬁxes writes σ⋄τand the re-
maining notation and operators for texts (content, preﬁxes
and indexing) deﬁned in Def 3.(d), also apply to preﬁxes.
(f)The set of all set preﬁxes . The set of all preﬁxes is writ-
tenSEQ={T[n]|Ta text and n∈N}.
Notice that for each language Lthere are inﬁnite many
texts, except for the empty set ∅which only accepts one sin-
gle text, namely, T∅such that ∀x∈NT∅(x) =#. For example,
the following three texts all exhaustively exemplify the re al-
ity of the sentences representing even numbers:
2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18 . . .
#, 2, #, 4, 4, #, 6, 6, 6, # . . .
#, 2, 6, 4, 10, 8, 14, 12, 18 . . .
We are now in a condition to formalise the idea of learner,
or scientist, as they are called in this area. We want some-
thing that given partial ﬁnite data outputs a hypothesis.
Deﬁnition 4 - Scientist (Learner).
(a)Scientist . A scientist is a function M:SEQ→P.
(b)Scientist conjectures reality . LetTbe a text and n∈N,
then a scientist Mis said to conjecture the language Lon
preﬁxT[n]if and only if WM(T[n])=L, i.e., if scientist
Moutputs a grammar for Lwhen given as input the initial
sequence of length nfromT.
It is essential to note that this deﬁnition of scientist is
notably broad, encompassing even scientists that can never
be implemented in computers, i.e., uncomputable scientist s.Such wide-ranging deﬁnition was crucial to drawing conclu-
sions regarding the computability of learning since it faci li-
tated the comparison of the learning limitations of this bro ad
class of scientists with those limitations encountered whe n
considering exclusively computable scientists. We procee d
to present one criterion that assesses the success of a scien -
tist in a given text: identiﬁability.
Deﬁnition 5 - Identiﬁcation (Criterion). LetMbe a scien-
tist andTa text, respectively.
(a)Convergence on a text .M(T)↓=p, reading Mcon-
verges to ponT, if and only if for all but ﬁnitely many
n∈N, we have M(T[n]) =p. IfMdoesn’t converge to
anypthen we write M(T)↑, reading Mdiverges in T.
(b)Text identiﬁcation .Mis said to identify Tjust in
case there is a psuch that M(T)↓=pandWp=
content(T), i.e., just in case Mconjectures the language
L=content(T)on all but ﬁnitely many preﬁxes of T.
(c)Language identiﬁcation .Mis said to identify the lan-
guageL∈Ejust in case Midentiﬁes every text for L.
(d)Identiﬁcation of a classes of languages . LetL⊆Ebe
given.Midentiﬁes Lif and only if it identiﬁes all L∈L.
Then,Lis said identiﬁable in case there is a scientist that
identiﬁes it; it is said to be unidentiﬁable otherwise.
Several critical observations regarding this deﬁnition of
identiﬁcation need to be considered. Firstly, it is crucial
to notice that, according to the deﬁnition, to identify a lan -
guage,L, the scientist needs only to identify all the texts for
the given language, without restrictions about what happen s
in other texts. Thus, in FLT, only the identiﬁability of clas ses
of languages is worth discussing, since discussing the iden -
tiﬁability of singular languages is rendered superﬂuous, a s
every given single language L∈Eis trivially identiﬁed by
at least one scientist: the scientist that regardless of its input
constantly outputs p∈P, such that pis the smallest gram-
mar forL. We will name such a scientist a dumb visionary
(Def 6). Such broad deﬁnitions expand the ideas of both
“learner” and “learning” to include these very dumb or stub-
born behaviours, which becomes very useful to prove results
but obviously raises criticism against this framework in wh at
concerns its ﬁdelity and capacity to model real learning be-
haviour. The ﬁeld addresses these criticisms by extending
the framework, redeﬁning one or more of these components
while being guided by already proven results.
Deﬁnition 6 - Dumb Visionary. Given a language L, the
dumb visionary for L, writtenDVL, is deﬁned as the scientist
that, regardless of its input, constantly outputs the minim um
programp∈Psuch that Wp=L.
One simple interesting result from the FLT ﬁeld is that
scientists that can be agnostic about the time they have con-
verged, i.e., they are not imposed to announce their conver-
gence, can identify more classes of languages than those im-
posed to announce their convergence. This and other intrigu -
ing results could be proved within this framework, yet in thi s
text, we need to move on to discussing this theory inside the
context of CC. In this new context, the shop assistant can be
replaced by a professional composer, yet no consequences
of this change will actually be explored in this early work.Towards Formal Creativity Theory
The deﬁnitions previously discussed were initially devel-
oped focusing on the learning component of language and
science. We believe that these deﬁnitions can be refurbishe d
to provide a more rigorous view on CC concepts and pos-
sibly a new formalization to explore creativity in a purely
theoretical way. Thus, the initial goal of this section is to ex-
amine some creativity-related terms through the lens of the
previously provided deﬁnitions. We shortly introduce some
concepts from the canonical literature of CC, and what we
consider could be their formal reinterpreted deﬁnition und er
the lens of FLT. Some of these terms are essentially renames
of structures from FLT. We believe that the process of re-
naming has been instrumental in generating new concepts
since it facilitates a clearer understanding. We think of th e
set of these deﬁnitions as the beginning of a ﬁeld that, by
parallelism, we designate Formal Creativity Theory (FCT).
Artefacts
The seminal work by Rhodes (1961), proposing the four P’s
of creativity, introduces the idea of ‘Product,’ also tradi tion-
ally referred to as artefact, as one of the main components of
creative behaviour. For our purposes, we conceptualize an
artefact as being represented by a sentence, or, equivalent ly,
we redeﬁne Aas the set of all possible artefacts. This allows
us to abstract and generalize our results across domains, bu t
also pushes this theory away from practical research.
Deﬁnition 7 - Artefact. A product, an artefact (or a concept)
is any member a∈A, the set of all possible artefacts.
Experience and Fate Sequences
While exploring the concept of ‘preﬁx’ in the context of a
creative scenario, it corresponds to the experience that an
agent has access to in a given moment. Therefore, in this
context, we decided to provide another term to refer to this
structure: ‘experience sequence’. This refers to the cumu-
lative and ordered ﬁnite list of an individual’s prior singu lar
experiences with various artefacts. If we have an inﬁnite
list, i.e., a text, as we call it in FLT, we will call it a ‘fate s e-
quence’ in FCT. While a scientist can undergo an experience
sequence, they can never totally undergo a fate sequence.
Deﬁnition 8 - Experience and Fate Sequences. An experi-
ence (sequence) is a preﬁx, σ∈SEQ , that can be undergone
by scientist. A fate (sequence) is the same as a text, T.
Situation
We decided then to deﬁne ‘situation’ as a pair consisting of
a scientist and an experience. Despite not being a common
idea in CC, we believe that formalizing this component as a
pair is crucial for later analysis, especially when conside ring
properties of an artefact that depend on the experience, the
scientist, or the interaction between the two.
Deﬁnition 9 - Situation. A situation sis any ordered pair
s= (M,σ)withMa scientist and σan experience. We use
Sto represent the class of all situations.Conceptual Spaces
Conceptual spaces have been commonly discussed in CC
(Boden, 2004; Gardenfors, 2004), even though sometimes
with different meanings. We propose to formalize a con-
ceptual space as a r.e. set, i.e., any set of artefacts that ca n
be intentionally deﬁned (Def 10). This way, any program
over artefacts deﬁnes a conceptual space and all of these can
be intentionally deﬁned using a hypothesis. This deﬁnition
aligns with Ritchie’s (2006) idea of conceptual space8. Fur-
thermore, we wish to distinguish three special kinds of con-
ceptual space: the inspiring set, the hypothetical concept ual
space, and the platonic conceptual space.
Deﬁnition 10 - Conceptual Space. A conceptual space is
any r.e. set, A∈E.
Inspiring Sets
According to Ritchie (2007, p. 76), in CC the “construction
of the program is inﬂuenced (either explicitly or implicitl y)
by some subset of the available basic items (...) which we
will call the inspiring set.” Following the deﬁnitions from
FLT, it seems logical to deﬁne the inspiring set based on
what is available to the scientist, i.e., experiences. Then , we
have that the inspiring set is precisely the unordered con-
tent of the experience sequence (Def 8). The set and the se-
quence are then two different ways to represent inspiration ,
the latter allowing repetitions, while the former does not.
Deﬁnition 11 - Inspiring Set. Letσbe an experience, then
we also call content(σ), the inspiring set, written Iσor just
Iwhen the preﬁx is not ambiguous.
Hypothetical Conceptual Spaces
This concept is not commonly found in CC literature. In-
stead, it resulted from the exploration of creativity throu gh
the lens of FLT. A hypothetical conceptual space, H, is any
conceptual space conjectured by a scientist (Def 12). We
see then that a situation s∈Stotally deﬁnes a hypothetical
conceptual space9. Additionally, given a fate, we have an
inﬁnite sequence of hypothetical conceptual spaces.
Deﬁnition 12 - Hypothetical Conceptual Spaces. Lets=
(M,σ)be a situation, then we say that Hs=WM(σ)is the
hypothetical conceptual space associated with that situat ion,
i.e., it is the conceptual space conjectured by scientist M
when undergoing σ.
In FLT, there is a branch dedicated to studying the impli-
cations of assuming certain relationships between the hypo -
thetical conceptual spaces and the corresponding inspirin g
sets. For example, a consistent scientist is any scientist s uch
that for any situation s= (M,σ)we have that Iσ⊆Hs10.
8Ritchie (2006) suggests that the term ‘artefact-set’ corre sponds
to the set that actually contains artefacts, which we simply call the
conceptual space, and the term ‘space-deﬁnition’ to the int entional
deﬁnition of this set, which we call the hypotheses or the rul es of
the conceptual space, as mentioned later in this text.
9Non-total scientists that are not deﬁned in all experiences are
possible, allowing to model indecision but adding extra com plexity.
10These and other kinds of constraints imposed on scientists a re
considered a type extension to the SILIT known as strategies .Platonic Conceptual Space
The platonic conceptual space, P, is the correct reality
among the possible ones, the conceptual space that origi-
nates a given fate. Conceptually, changing the platonic con -
ceptual space means considering an alternative reality. Th e
fate, the inﬁnite sequence of artefacts the scientist will e xpe-
rience, is always congruent with a given platonic conceptua l
space and contains all of its elements11. The fate, then, rep-
resents the sequence that encompasses all the artefacts the
scientist will ever have access to while trying to guess P.
Deﬁnition 13 - Platonic Conceptual Space. Given a fate T,
the platonic conceptual space, P, with which Tis congruent,
is such that P=content(T).
Paraphrasing the previously deﬁned criterion for identiﬁ-
cation (Def 5.(b)), a scientist is said to identify a fate, T, if
and only if in all but ﬁnitely many experiences of T, the hy-
pothetical conceptual space is the same as the platonic con-
ceptual space12. Also, a collection of platonic conceptual
spaces is identiﬁable if, for each one Pof these, there is a
scientist capable of identifying all fates congruent with P.
In the anecdote, the platonic conceptual space corresponds
to the client’s idea of ‘grey music’ and the hypothetical con -
ceptual spaces to the several hypothetical genres the assis -
tant goes through after each provided song.
Rules
In the Creative Systems Framework (CSF), Wiggins (2019)
presents three sets of rules - R,T,E. These rules play dif-
ferent roles in the creative process - the ﬁrst one is used to
deﬁne the boundaries of a special conceptual space, the sec-
ond is used to generate new artefacts and the last one is used
to choose the artefacts with value. While both the ﬁrst and
third are used to distinguish artefacts that belong to a spec iﬁc
conceptual space or those that are valuable, respectively, the
second one provides an ordered sequence of artefacts. In
SILIT, the notion of hypothesis corresponds to the implicit
representation of a language. Seems appropriate, then, to
correspond such sets of rules to hypotheses (Def 14), de-
spite some being used to decide and others to enumerate. In
the future, we intend to explore CSF-aligned scientists, th at
output 3 sets of rules, pR,pTorpE, instead of just one.
Deﬁnition 14 - Rules. A set of rules is a program, p∈P.
Properties
In traditional FLT, various extended models for data (envi-
ronments), classes of learners (strategies), and success c ri-
teria (criteria) are explored. Yet, to our knowledge, there
is close to no exploration of how these can take advantage
of the properties of the artefacts, perhaps due to abstracti on
complexity. Conversely, in CC literature, it is a common but
not exclusive viewpoint that a creative act is characterize d by
11FLT includes other structures that consider other relation ships
betweenPandT- a type of extensions named environments - ac-
counting for missing data, wrong data, or additional inform ation.
12The last kind of extension is to consider alternative succes s
criteria to simulate approximate learning or indecision.a process yielding creative artefacts. Therefore, many of t he
efforts in CC wander around artefacts and their properties.
Several have then been the properties proposed as desider-
ata to discern creative artefacts, such as novelty, typical ity,
value, quality or even surprise.
We propose to include ‘property extensions’ to FCT as a
new extension type. This new kind of extension enables the
creation of new paradigms, by constraining the class of sci-
entists based on these properties, or just by employing dif-
ferent criteria that deﬁne success based on such properties .
Due to space limitations, we do not fully detail how prop-
erties can alter the basic paradigm but will brieﬂy introduc e
two formal properties and some conclusions.
Schema
To implement this extension, we adapt the idea of ‘rating
schemas’, proposed by Ritchie (2007), that correspond to
operators that can be applied to artefacts. While Ritchie
(2007) implements schema ratings as fuzzy sets, for simplic -
ity, in this initial approach to CC using FLT, we suggest to
have schemas as predicates (Def 15). Similarly to Wiggins’
(2006) dichotomic evaluation rules, E13, this simple imple-
mentation allows for only two states of value: valuable arte -
facts and non-valuable artefacts. Despite facilitating th eory,
this simplicity-driven design choice can raise criticism, since
our ﬁndings may not apply to alternative rating schema mod-
els that might be more accurate. However, it aligns with FLT
methodology: proving results for a simpliﬁed model ﬁrst,
then extending to more complex versions, with insights from
the simpler approach facilitating subsequent proofs.
Deﬁnition 15 - Schema. A (dichotomic rating) schema Vis
just any predicate over artefacts, V:A→{0, 1}. An artefact
ais then said to be V-valuable if V(a) =1.
According to this deﬁnition, any predicate over artefacts
can be interpreted as a schema, regardless of the domain,
allowing for uncomputable schemas that can never be com-
pletely correctly grasped in a conceptual space. Yet, a set
of rules for a conceptual space can always be used to build
a schema. In this study, we decided to focus on schemas
parameterized by an experience and a scientist. We provide
next the working deﬁnitions of one well-known and widely
used property of artefacts from CC - novelty, VN- as well
as introduce a new one - transformativeness, VTr- relating
to transformational creativity (Boden, 2004).
Novelty
While properties such as complexity or typicality have been
debated as necessary components for creativity, novelty ha s
increasingly been agreed as one main one, to the point that
creativity has been seen as the “production of novel, use-
ful products” (Mumford, 2003, p. 110). Wiggins (2006,
p. 25) deﬁnes novelty as “the property of an artefact (ab-
stract or concrete) output by a creative system which arises
from prior non-existence of like or identical artefacts in t he
context in which the artefact is produced.” We deﬁne that an
13Though Wiggins focuses on predicates, he mentions in the pa-
per the potential for extending his proposal to fuzzy sets.artefactais novel, given an inspiring set Iσ, ifa /∈Iσ. De-
spite this being a reductionist notion of novelty, it allows to
derive interesting results when paired with other properti es.
Deﬁnition 16 - Novelty. NoveltyVNis a schema parame-
terized by a situation s= (M,σ). An artefact ais said to be
novel in situation s, writingVN(a,s) =1, iffa /∈Iσ.
We can see that a scientist can compute this value metric
since it only depends on the experience. This means that the
scientist can access the true value of this schema. This is
not true for all schemas, as there are schemas that can only
be approximated by the scientists, which will be the case
for the next schema. Since our model of these schemas is
parameterized, we can see that novelty is not intrinsic to an
artefact, it depends on the experience provided to a scienti st.
It makes no sense then to evaluate this predicate out of the
context of a speciﬁc situation.
Transformativeness
Following Boden’s (2004) proposal of different kinds of
creativity - exploratory, combinational and transformati onal
creativity - more common than not, research in CC is in-
ﬂuenced by the “widely discussed proposal by Boden that
high levels of creativity result from the transformation of a
conceptual space” (Ritchie, 2006, p. 242). Wiggins (2019,
p. 31) paraphrases Boden’s transformational creativity as
“the kind of creative behaviour concerned (. . . ) with trans-
forming the rule set” that deﬁnes a conceptual space.
The interplay between transformational creativity and
learning is inherently complex and deeply interconnected.
Through analyzing hypothetical scenarios of creative be-
haviour, we identiﬁed two main cases for the relationship
between learning and creativity: one where learning pre-
cedes exploration, akin to the preparation phase described
by Wallas (1926); and another where learning occurs during
exploration, aligning with what Wiggins (2019) describes a s
transformational creativity. When analyzing real cases, d is-
tinguishing when exploration begins and preparation ends
become subjective, so one can only differentiate transfor-
mational creativity from well-prepared exploratory creat iv-
ity by ﬁxing a starting point for the exploration process.
Generalizing Wiggins’ (2019) idea of transformational
creativity as changing an intentional representation, and re-
lating it to how scientists learn in FLT, we say that trans-
formational creativity happens whenever a scientist chang es
their hypothesis in a growing experience. Formally, we ob-
serve transformational creativity if a scientist outputs h1
from experience σ1, and then generates a different hypothe-
sish2when undergoing σ1⋄a. Not all artefacts will trigger
such shift in a speciﬁc situation. Those which do are said
transformative, a property we named ‘transformativeness’ .
Deﬁnition 17 - Transformativeness. Transformativeness
VTris a schema parameterized by a situation s= (M,σ).
An artefact ais said to be transformative in situation s, i.e.,
VTr(a,s) =1, iffM(σ)/ne}ationslash=M(σ⋄a).
This is, to the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst formal pro-
posal to deﬁne transformational creativity that allows to d i-
rectly compare with other properties such as novelty.Preliminary Results
Novelty has been widely discussed in Computational Cre-
ativity as a mandatory requirement for creative behaviour.
The common way to study this aspect then became to study
what makes a product novel and ﬁnd search strategies that
could increase the likelihood of novelty. Yet, one other as-
pect of novelty we can study, given these new deﬁnitions,
is its relationship with other properties such as transform a-
tiveness. We aim to study how experiencing novel artefacts
affects learning or, in our case, how it affects creativity -
namely how necessary it is for transformational creativity
(Boden, 2004). It is unspokenly assumed that novelty is
needed for transformational creativity to happen. This is
yet another reason for novelty being valued in creativity -
because novel artefacts are assumed to impact conceptual
models. We prove here that if we consider the general class
of scientists, it is wrong to assume that there is a relation-
ship between novelty and the transformation of conceptual
spaces! We prove that, in this wide class of agents, there is
no such relationship and we illustrate the results using ex-
amples. We then show that for a sub-class of scientists, it is
correct to assume such a relationship.
Novelty is not sufﬁcient for Transformativeness
Could it be that all pieces of novel information will always
make one change their mind? In this framework, we can de-
ﬁne scientists that defy such assumption. Actually, we have
inﬁnitely many scientists that break such statement, some
very trivial, others more complex.
Theorem 1. Artefactabeing novel in situation sdoes not
implyais transformative in that same situation.
Proof . We will provide a situation sand an artefact asuch
thatais novel but not transformative in situation s. Suppose
Mhis a constant scientist, i.e., there is constant h∈N, such
that for every σ∈SEQ ,M(σ) =h. An example of such
kind of scientists is what we deﬁned as dumb visionaries
DVA(Def 6). Now, suppose a situation s= (Mh,σ)with
a ﬁxedσ∈SEQ . Suppose as well any artefact asuch that
a /∈Iσ. Suchamust exist since Iσis always ﬁnite due to the
ﬁnitude of σ, i.e., independently of the chosen experience
there is always at least one novel artefact. By deﬁnition,
we see that the chosen ais novel in s, yetM(σ) =h=
M(σ⋄a), henceais not transformative. /squaresolid
As this proof shows, we showcase scientists for whom
novelty alone is insufﬁcient to alter their ideas. Even thou gh
these seem very simple scientists, we can build more com-
plex scientists that would prove such a theorem, such as
any scientist who identiﬁes an inﬁnite language. If nov-
elty was sufﬁcient to make any scientist change their opin-
ion, then any fate for an inﬁnite platonic conceptual space
would have inﬁnite points of transformation and therefore
no scientist could ever identify it. Yet, we think the sim-
ple scientists provided in the proof illustrate well the arg u-
ment in point, since despite their triviality these simple s ci-
entists still identify one platonic conceptual space. We ca n
compare these to people with unjustiﬁed beliefs who are im-
mune to any kind of evidence, yet can be, by chance, right insome cases/realities, and that despite novelty they will ne ver
change their beliefs.
Novelty is not necessary for Transformativeness
Maybe even more surprising is that, within these deﬁnitions ,
novelty is also not required for transformativeness. Trans -
formativeness can occur in situations and artefacts that fa il
to meet the novelty criterion.
Theorem 2. Artefactabeing transformative in situation s
does not imply ais novel in that same situation.
Proof . In this case, we need to provide a situation sand
an artefact asuch that ais transformative but not novel in
situation s. Suppose M′is an ever-changing scientist, i.e.,
M′(σ)/ne}ationslash=M′(σ⋄b)for every σandb. An example of
such a scientist is a scientist whose output depends only on
the size of the experience, such as M′(σ) =|σ|Suppose a
situations= (M′,σ)for ﬁxedσ∈SEQ butIσ/ne}ationslash=∅. Let us
choose an artefact such that a∈Iσ. We see that the chosen
ais not novel, because we explicitly chose something that
was already experienced by the scientist, yet our scientist
changes always their hypothesis when his experience grows
soM(σ)/ne}ationslash=M(σ⋄a)henceais transformative. /squaresolid
Once again, these are very trivial scientists. These, con-
trary to the constant ones, are actually not able to identify
anything. A more complex and more realistic example to
prove such a result would be a scientist that annotates how
conﬁdent it is in its hypotheses by appending a comment to
the hypotheses. If the artefact matched its hypotheses then
it would increase the conﬁdence by one point, otherwise it
would decrease the conﬁdence or even make it change com-
pletely if conﬁdence reached zero. Such scientist is by def-
inition ever-changing and therefore also proves the theore m
above, for syntactic transformativeness. This scientist c an
converge semantically and can be used to identify using an
expansion to the identiﬁcation criterion previously prese nted
- behaviourally correct identiﬁcation.
For Set-Driven Scientists, Novelty is necessary for
Transformativeness
A scientist is said to be set-driven if for σ,τ∈SEQ , if
content(σ) =content(τ)thenM(σ) =M(τ). A “set-driven
scientist is insensitive to the order in which data are prese nt”
(Jain et al., 1999, p. 99). We will prove that for these sci-
entists, novelty is a requirement for transformativeness. We
have two conditions:
1.Condition 1 : for scientist Mandσ,τ∈SEQ ,
content(σ) = content(τ)=⇒M(σ) =M(τ), i.e., us-
ing inspiring set notation, Iσ=Iτ=⇒M(σ) =M(τ)
2.Condition 2 : for artefact aand situation s= (M,σ),
VTr(a,s)=⇒VN(a,s)
Theorem 3. Condition 1 is sufﬁcient for Condition 2 , i.e.,
if a scientist is set-driven then novelty is necessary for tr ans-
formativeness in that same situation.
Proof . Let us start by assuming Condition 1 , i.e., let M
be a set-driven scientist. So given any artifact a, and anyexperience σ, we have Iσ=Iσ⋄a=⇒M(σ) =M(σ⋄a).
This means the contrapositive M(σ)/ne}ationslash=M(σ⋄a)=⇒
Iσ/ne}ationslash=Iσ⋄a. Thus for any situation s= (M,σ), we have then
thatVTr(a,s)=⇒Iσ/ne}ationslash=Iσ⋄a. In turn, Iσ/ne}ationslash=Iσ⋄a=⇒
(Iσ−Iσ⋄a/ne}ationslash=∅∨Iσ⋄a−Iσ/ne}ationslash=∅). Additionally to the
previous one, we prove now two sub-results. A) From the
deﬁnitions of inspiring set and ⋄, we know that for any σ,τ
we have that Iσ⊆Iσ⋄τ, then, we always have also that
Iσ−Iσ⋄τ=∅. B) Similarly, for any σ,τ∈SEQ , it is always
true thatIσ⋄τ−Iσ⊆Iτ, thusIσ⋄a−Iσ⊆{a}. Given the
last three results, we may conclude that Iσ⋄a−Iσ={a},
and that therefore a /∈Iσ, that corresponds to our deﬁnition
of novelty, VN(a,s), so we reached Condition 2 ./squaresolid
The consequences of this theorem are signiﬁcant. At ﬁrst
glance, we see that it is appropriate to assume that novelty i s
actually necessary for transformational creativity when c on-
sidering set-driven agents such as those based on the inspir -
ing sets proposed by Ritchie (2007). Yet, on a second look
we may also conclude that assuming such set-driven prop-
erties seems to constitute a big change in the paradigm, im-
plicating several other assumptions and changing drastica lly
the way creativity is modelled. We believe it is of the most
relevance to understand the implications and consequences
of such assumptions. This can only be achieved by formal
studies and bringing clarity to how these assumptions relat e
as well as their limitations. Implementation of set-driven
systems can beneﬁt from a better knowledge of these as-
sumptions, since human behaviour seems sensitive to repe-
tition and order in experiences.
Note that the presented result does not mean that when-
ever we consider novelty as necessary for transformativene ss
we are actually considering set-driven scientists. We can u se
the formal tools to prove that this is not the case. As a short
version of this proof, we can suggest the case of the scien-
tist who always outputs the last novel artefact, which meets
Condition 2 while not being set-driven (not Condition 1 ).
Future Work
The richness of this research path made the space restric-
tions of this format quite challenging. Thus, there are seve ral
promising directions that stayed out of this paper. Firstly ,
alternative deﬁnitions, such as semantic transformativen ess,
and the formalization of other CC concepts, like typicality ,
both represent opportunities to enhance our understanding of
creativity’s subtleties. Additionally, we also aim to unco ver
new insights through the formal modeling of other assump-
tions, such as Wiggins’ (2006) premise that transformative
artifacts must lie outside the current hypothetical concep -
tual space — termed aberrations. Another avenue involves
considering schemas parameterized by various components,
such as fates (Def 8), or moving beyond predicates to em-
brace alternative schema representations like fuzzy sets o r
semi-orders. Lastly, a critical exploration into the com-
putability of these properties could yield valuable knowl-
edge about the practicality and limitations of applying the se
theoretical constructs in real systems.
Despite mentioning ‘property extensions’ within this text ,
we have only deﬁned some of the properties that could un-derpin a new paradigm, never explaining how we could build
such paradigm out of these deﬁnitions. A longer format
would be necessary to fully present these paradigms, what
they can model and how they relate to other classic FLT ex-
tensions such as accountable scientists, incomplete fates and
the behaviourly correct criterion.
Lastly, a primary objective for our future research is to ex-
plore scientists capable of producing multiple sets of rule s,
reviewing the role discrimination and generation have with in
theory of computation. This approach aims to more accu-
rately model the CSF, providing a nuanced understanding of
creativity through the lens of FLT.
Conclusion
According to Wiggins (2019, p. 36), a “theoretical frame-
work, such as that presented here, may be useful in teasing
out philosophical issues, but it may also be useful in giving
generalised descriptions of behaviours which might be ob-
served in creative agents.” The present paper provides an
accessible way to understand the advantage of using theo-
retical frameworks – namely FLT – to study CC.
In this paper, we prove that novel artefacts are neither nec-
essary nor sufﬁcient for transformational creativity when we
consider the wide range of possible behaviours over a se-
quence of artefacts. However, if we consider agents that dis -
regard the order as well as the repetitions, then novelty be-
comes a requirement. We concluded then that agents based
only on inspiring sets, as suggested by Ritchie (2007), migh t
be disregarding some of the characteristics that make human
creativity interesting, such as the fact that the same artef act
can actually change one’s mind more than once.
While practical research is crucial, its overvaluation oft en
sidelines theoretical studies. The current trend of valuin g
research topics mainly for their immediate practical appli ca-
tions can, if overemphasized, risk limiting broader societ al
progress to short-term gains. Theory can clarify the conse-
quences of certain assumptions and guide developments in
the long run. It is necessary to revitalize fundamental re-
search by providing novel, pure, and non-applied results.
These approaches are one of the characteristics that dis-
tinguishes what we consider to be CC and Creative AI so we
believe it is time to ﬁnally make it ofﬁcial and have a sub-
branch dedicated to these matters – the sub-branch of Com-
putational Creativity Theory (CCT). We believe this sugges -
tion aligns well with Colton et al.’s (2015) original propos al
of CCT that aimed at establishing a theory in CC akin to
CLT. However, it is worth noting that over time this term
has more often than not been associated with speciﬁc mod-
els – FACE and IDEA (Colton, Charnley, and Pease, 2011;
Pease and Colton, 2011) – published by the same authors
under this banner. Our intention is to reclaim and broaden
the term to designate a comprehensive research area, which
closely aligns with what we think was Colton et al.’s (2015)
original aspiration for CCT and possibly fulﬁlling its orig i-
nal aim. To that end, we include under CCT, the new pro-
posed set of deﬁnitions – the beggining of FCT.Author Contributions
The primary author took the lead in writing and develop-
ing the theoretical framework of this paper as part of their
PhD work, which included the formulation of theorems and
their respective proofs. The co-authors, who are the pri-
mary author’s supervisors, made substantial contribution s
through their critical review, feedback, and engaging dis-
cussions during supervisory meetings. Their expertise and
insights were crucial in reﬁning the deﬁnitions, enhancing
the presentation of the matters, and ensuring the scholarly
quality of the ﬁnal manuscript.
Acknowledgments
We extend our heartfelt thanks to our colleagues at the
CCLab and the CMS, with special appreciation for Andr´ e
Santos and M´ arcio Lima, for their invaluable and constant
support. This work is funded by national funds through the
FCT - Foundation for Science and Technology, I.P., within
the scope of the project CISUC - UID/CEC/00326/2020
and by European Social Fund, through the Regional Op-
erational Program Centro 2020. The ﬁrst author is also
individually funded by Foundation for Science and Tech-
nology (FCT), Portugal, under the PhD fellowship grants
(2021.05529.BD).
References
Angluin, D. 1980. Inductive inference of formal languages
from positive data.
Blum, and Blum. 1975. Toward a mathematical theory of
inductive inference. Infect. Control .
Boden, M. A. 1994. Creativity: A framework for research.
Behav. Brain Sci. 17(3):558–570.
Boden, M. A. 2004. The creative mind: Myths and mecha-
nisms . London, England: Routledge, 2 edition.
Bundy, A. 1994. What is the difference between real cre-
ativity and mere novelty? Behav. Brain Sci. 17(3).
Case, J., and Smith, C. 1983. Comparison of identiﬁcation
criteria for machine inductive inference. Theor. Comput.
Sci.25(2):193–220.
Case, J. 2012. Algorithmic scientiﬁc inference. Interna-
tional Journal of Unconventional Computing 8(3).
Colton, S.; Pease, A.; Corneli, J.; Cook, M.; Hepworth, R.;
and Ventura, D. 2015. Stakeholder groups in computa-
tional creativity research and practice. In Atlantis Think-
ing Machines . Paris: Atlantis Press. 3–36.
Colton, S.; Charnley, J.; and Pease, A. 2011. Computational
creativity theory: The FACE and IDEA descriptive mod-
els.Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on
Computational Creativity, ICCC 2011 .
E. Mark Gold. 1967. Language identiﬁcation in the limit.
Information and Control 10(5):447–474.
Gardenfors, P. 2004. Conceptual Spaces: The Geometry of
Thought . MIT Press.Guilford, J. P. 1950. Creativity. American Psychologist
5(9):444–454.
Jain, S.; Osherson, D.; Royer, J. S.; and Sharma, A. 1999.
Systems that Learn: An Introduction to Learning Theory .
MIT Press.
Koestler, A. 2014. The act of creation . One 70 Press.
Mondol, T., and Brown, D. G. 2021. Incorporating al-
gorithmic information theory into fundamental concepts
of computational creativity. In Proceedings of the 12th
International Conference on Computational Creativity,
ICCC 2021 . Association for Computational Creativity
{(ACC)}.
Mumford, M. D. 2003. Where have we been, where are we
going? taking stock in creativity research. Creat. Res. J.
15(2-3):107–120.
Pease, A., and Colton, S. 2011. Computational creativity
theory: Inspirations behind the FACE and the IDEA mod-
els.Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on
Computational Creativity, ICCC 2011 72–77.
Rhodes, M. 1961. An analysis of creativity. Phi Delta
Kappan 42(7):305–310.
Ritchie, G. 2006. The transformational creativity hypothe -
sis.New Generation Computing 24(3):241–266.
Ritchie, G. 2007. Some empirical criteria for attributing
creativity to a computer program. Minds Mach. 17(1):67–
99.
Rogers, H. 1967. Theory of Recursive Functions and Effec-
tive Computability . McGraw-Hill.
Schmidhuber, J. 2010. Formal theory of creativity, fun,
and intrinsic motivation (1990–2010). IEEE Trans. Auton.
Ment. Dev. 2(3):230–247.
Turing, A. M. 1937. On computable numbers, with an ap-
plication to the entscheidungsproblem. Proc. Lond. Math.
Soc. s2-42(1):230–265.
Varshney, L. R. 2019. Mathematical limit theorems for com-
putational creativity. IBM J. Res. Dev. 63(1):2:1–2:12.
Varshney, L. R. 2020. Limits theorems for creativity with
intentionality. ICCC .
Ventura, D. 2011. No free lunch in the search for creativity.
InProceedings of the 2nd International Conference on
Computational Creativity .
Wallas, G. 1926. The art of thought , volume 10. Harcourt,
Brace.
Wiggins, G. A. 2006. Searching for computational creativ-
ity.New Gener. Comput. 24(3):209–222.
Wiggins, G. A. 2019. A framework for description, analysis
and comparison of creative systems. In Veale, T., and Car-
doso, F. A., eds., Computational Creativity: The Philoso-
phy and Engineering of Autonomously Creative Systems .
Cham: Springer International Publishing. 21–47.